INTRODUCTION Philosophy begins in the West with a group of philosophers variously known as the natural philosophers or the pre-Socratics. Men—and the history of Western philosophy has been dominated by males—such as Thales, Anaximander, Anaximenes, Parmenides, Empedocles, and Heraclitus were all engaged in an attempt to discover the secrets of the natural world, to reduce the mass of phenomena to a few manageable principles, and to understand their natural environments. What held them together was a belief that one could reason one’s way to the truth, that by looking at natural effects one could deduce their causes. What distinguished one from the other was that they each reasoned their way to different causes. For some, the natural world was reducible to one immovable substance. For others, there were four basic elements (earth, air, fire, and water). Others saw five or six or even more basic causes. This led a group of philosophers, the Sophists, to react against the program of the natural philosophers. Whereas the natural philosophers assumed that an educated person, a wise person, was one who knew the truth about things natural, the Sophists claimed that since “reason” generated so many different conclusions, there was something unreliable about reason itself. If, the Sophists suggested, reason were a reliable tool, it should always yield the same results. It did not; hence, the Sophists shifted inquiry away from an attempt to discover the truth about the natural world to an attempt to teach a useful skill. The Sophists were the first professional teachers. They went around to the families of young boys—again, notice this orientation toward males—and offered to teach those boys how to argue persuasively. The Sophists said, in effect: We don’t care what your position is. We don’t care whether you are telling the truth or not. We will teach you how to make your case and how to win arguments. This was an especially valuable skill because eventually those boys would, as heads of households, have to speak in the public forums that constituted Greek democracy. If they could not speak well, their family’s fortune would suffer. Into this mix—a mix that included a switch from the educated person as she or he who knew the truth about the natural world to the educated person as she or he who could argue persuasively regardless of the truth or falsity of the position—came the character Socrates. If one reads the dialogue Apology carefully, one will see that two of the accusations against Socrates suggest that Socrates was both a natural philosopher and a Sophist at the same time. Certainly, since one was a reaction against the other, Socrates cannot be both. But what was Socrates? What was his doctrine? Why was he so important? We will try to answer those questions in the second part of this introduction.
Middle Period Works focus on theory of ideas and metaphysical doctrines. Included in this period are Meno, Symposium, Phaedo, The Republic, and Phaedrus. Late Period Works focus on a reconsideration of the middle period, most notably the theory of ideas. Included in this period are Theaetetus, Parmenides, Sophist, Statesman, Philebus, Timaeus, and The Laws.
M01_JOHN0380_04_SE_C01.qxd  1/7/11  5:05 PM  Page 18
Chapter 1 • Socrates and Plato 19
Most of what we know about Socrates comes from three sources. Socrates did not write; indeed, he distrusted the written word, and so we must rely on the plays of Aristophenes and the dialogues of Xenophon and Plato.1 For our purposes, we will concentrate on those writings that are clearly the most important, both philosophically and historically, that is, the writing of Socrates’ student, Plato. Most commentators divide Plato’s writing into three major periods. In the early dialogues, Apology, Charmides, and Phaedo, for example, Plato gives a fairly accurate portrayal of Socrates. Plato was almost like a “fly on the wall” or a tape recorder, and one “hears” dialogues that may actually have taken place. This is the place to go to find out what Socrates was about and what he was teaching. In the middle period, The Republic is a good example of Plato’s using Socrates to espouse his (Plato’s) own doctrine. That doctrine is called the Theory of the Forms, and the middle period is the place to go if one wants to see what the mature Plato thought. Toward the end of his career, Plato had some doubts about his theory; in later dialogues like Parmenides, Theaetetus, and Sophist, one sees Plato rethinking and, perhaps, rejecting the theory. At the same time, because Socrates was Plato’s mouthpiece in the middle period, the character of Socrates now becomes a minor figure, becomes a figure of ridicule and scorn, or drops out altogether. The later dialogues are not the place to go to get an accurate picture of Socrates. So who was Socrates, and what did he espouse? The dialogue Apology is probably the best place to start. As mentioned previously, Socrates was on trial for his life. After rejecting a number of the more far-fetched accusations (accusations that suggested he was a natural philosopher and a Sophist), Socrates wonders what the real charge against him is. He settles on the charge that he is guilty of corrupting the morals of the youth of Athens. As one will see, “Socratic irony” is an apt description. Socrates, in the company of his students, engaged those with a reputation for wisdom in a dialogue. Over the course of those dialogues, Socrates discovered, and so did his students and the people who were questioned, that those with a reputation for wisdom did not always deserve it. Socrates was wiser than the “wisest” people because he knew his own limits: he knew that he did not know, while they mistakenly thought they did. For Socrates, the educated person is precisely the person who knows her or his limitations, who knows that she or he does not know. There are two points that are worthy of consideration. The first is that this person, whom many consider to be one of the two great teachers in the Western tradition (Jesus is the other), professed to have virtually no doctrine and said that what he knew was unimportant. Over and over again, in the Apology, the Phaedrus, and the Charmides, Socrates suggests that true wisdom is the property of the gods, and that what he has— this human wisdom, this knowledge of his own limitations—is worth hardly anything at all. The second point is that Socrates puts an enormous amount of weight, some might call it faith, on the power of the dialogue, that back-and-forth linguistic motion between speakers, to uncover the truth. When Socrates discusses ideas with those with a reputation for wisdom, a truth always emerges from the dialogue. The dialogue allows the truth to emerge—in the excerpt from The Republic,the truth is about some mistaken
1A dialogue is perhaps best understood as a focused attempt by a group of speakers to solve a limited number of problems or to answer a few questions.
M01_JOHN0380_04_SE_C01.qxd  1/7/11  5:05 PM  Page 19
20 Chapter 1 • Socrates and Plato
claims to knowledge. Socrates is different from the Sophists because he thinks there is a “truth” to be discovered. He is different from the natural philosophers because the method that he uses—discourse, dialogue, conversation—is public and communal; it is open to scrutiny in a way that reasoning, as a purely mental activity, is not. Plato, as one would expect from a student, took much from his teacher Socrates. For Plato, education is a matter of leading a person from mere belief to true knowledge. In his classic “Allegory of the Cave,” Plato suggests that we, as uneducated persons, are chained in a cave, seeing shadows on the wall and mistakenly believing that the shadows (and the cave itself) are the real things. Education involves breaking those chains and leading a person from the cave into the bright sunshine. The good teacher does this through the dialectical process, leading the student as far as she or he is capable. The best students—those most philosophical, those best educated—will use the dialectical process to discover true beauty, goodness, and justice. Plato is different from his teacher, Socrates, precisely because the wisdom that Plato’s students would discover is worth a good deal; that is, it involves knowledge of objective standards (the Forms) that will enable people to lead good, productive lives. The following selections include one from the Apology and two from The Republic. The first section from The Republic presents an introduction to the Theory of the Forms. In the second, Plato presents a story, “The Allegory of the Cave,” which is meant to shed light on the theory.
